Raspberry Pi: Hardware Preparation and Installation
Hardware Requirements:
1. Raspberry Pi
2. Monitor or TV
3. HDMI cable
4. Ethernet cable
5. USB keyboard
6. USB mouse
7. Micro USB power supply
8. 8GB or larger microSD card
9. SD Card Reader

1. Raspberry Pi 3 Model B
The Raspberry Pi 3 is the third generation Raspberry Pi. It replaced the Raspberry Pi 2 Model B in
February 2016.
Compared to the Raspberry Pi 2 it has:
• 1.2GHz 64-bit quad-core ARMv8 CPU
• 802.11n Wireless LAN
• Bluetooth 4.1
• Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
Like the Pi 2, it also has:
• 4 USB ports
• 40 GPIO pins
• Full HDMI port
• Ethernet port
• Combined 3.5mm audio jack and composite video
• Camera interface (CSI)
• Display interface (DSI)
• Micro SD card slot
• Video Core IV 3D graphics core
• The Raspberry Pi 3 has an identical form factor to the previous Pi 2 (and Pi 1 Model B+) and
has complete compatibility with Raspberry Pi 1 and 2.
2. Monitor or TV:
A monitor or TV with HDMI in can be used as a display with a Raspberry Pi. Most modern
television sets and monitors have an HDMI port, and are the easiest to get working with the
Raspberry Pi. You can use an HDMI cable to connect the Raspberry Pi directly to the television or
monitor. Some older monitors have a DVI port. These work well with the Raspberry Pi, although
you'll need an HDMI-to-DVI adapter to attach to an HDMI cable, or a one-piece HDMIto-DVI
cable. Some old monitors have a VGA port. These can be trickier to use as you'll need an HDMI-
to-VGA converter, which can change digital video to analogue video. A simple port adapter
won't work.
3. HDMI to HDMI Cable:
Connect Raspberry Pi to a Monitor or TV with a HDMI to HDMI cable.
4. Ethernet cable:
Ethernet cable will allow your Pi to connect with the internet. It is also useful for headless setup
of Raspberry Pi.
5. USB Keyboard and Mouse:
Any standard USB keyboard and mouse can be used with the Raspberry Pi. This plug and play
devices will work without any additional driver. Simply plug them into the Raspberry Pi and they
should be recognised when it starts up.
6. Power Supply:
It is recommended that you use a 5V, 2A USB power supply for all models of Raspberry Pi.
7. Micro SD Card:
The latest version of Raspbian, the default operating system recommended for the Raspberry Pi,
requires an 8GB (or larger) micro SD card. SD card will store the operating systems as well as all
the file and applications created by you.

Installation:
Now since you have all the required hardware, we will now learn how to get the operating
system onto your microSD card so that you can start using software on your Raspberry Pi 1. Get
Raspbian OS on your microSD card
i. Raspbian comes pre-installed with plenty of software for education, programming and general
use. It has Python, Scratch, Sonic Pi, Java, Mathematica and more.
ii. To download Raspbian log on to raspberrpi.org and click on the download, then click on
Raspbian and lastly download the RASPBIAN JESSIE WITH DESKTOP file. You can choose either
the Torrent file or ZIP file.
iii. The downloaded file will be in zip format. To unzip the file, you will require an unzip tool. You
can use any unzipping tool viz. WINRAR, 7ZIP etc. After unzipping the file, you will find a disc
image file in the unzipped folder.
iv. Now format the micro SD Card before writing the disc image file on the micro SD card. You
can use SD Formatter tool or any other tool. To write the image file of the operating system on
the SD card you will require a Disk Imager tool. For this you can use Win32 Disk Imager tool.
v. Once the image is written on the SD Card, your untitled SD card will now have the name boot.
Your SD Card will now hold the Raspbian Operating system required for the first-time setup.

Plugging in your Raspberry Pi:
1. Begin by placing your SD card into the SD card slot on the Raspberry Pi. It will only fit one way.
2. Next, plug your keyboard and mouse into the USB ports on the Raspberry Pi.
3. Make sure that your monitor or TV is turned on, and that you have selected the right input
(e.g. HDMI 1, DVI, etc). Connect your HDMI cable from your Raspberry Pi to your monitor or TV.
5. If you intend to connect your Raspberry Pi to the internet, plug an Ethernet cable into the
Ethernet port, or connect a WiFi dongle to one of the USB ports (unless you have a Raspberry Pi
3).
6. When you have plugged all the cables and SD card in correctly, connect the micro USB power
supply. This action will turn on and boot your Raspberry Pi.
